
WRITEUP
This should be a plain text file called PROTOTYPE.txt that answers these questions:

1. Provide a brief description of the implementation: What language did you use? What data does the program take as input? Is the data transformed in any way before you process it? In what ways do you process the data? What does your prototype produce as output? (raw data? formatted data? data in a known format? visualization?)

2. Relative to what you knew when you proposed the project, what have you learned about the dataset you're working with? Take into account that "nothing" is actually a valid answer (e.g., you might have poked at the data in various ways, and your analysis may have shown up nothing interesting). However, if the answer is "nothing", the you need to describe the ways in which you analyzed the data (and why the results were unsatisfactory).

3. In what ways (if any) has the initial exploration of the data affected how you plan to carry out the rest of the project? In other words, after a first look at the data, do you think you need to re-evaluate your goals for the project and, if so, how? (re-evaluating goals after an initial data exploration is not intrinsically bad; in fact, it's hard to commit to specific goals when you haven't even taken a first stab at the data).

4. Describe the most challenging aspect of working with the dataset you chose.


Your writeup should be around 2 pages long (but this is not a hard limit; if you feel you have a lot to say, you can write more than that). fyi, the writeup will be weighed more heavily than the instructions document.


1. We used R. The program takes as in put a .txt file of all NBA players with their statistics for:
team,leag,gp,minutes,pts,oreb,dreb,reb,asts,stl,blk,turnover,pf,fga,fgm,fta,ftm,tpa,tpm
The data is normalied before being processed. For a data point x, we find the max and min for that column and normalize according to:
 
					x - min
		x_norm = _______________

				   max - min

The prototype produces a list of player clusters, which are the different "roles" played by NBA players.
We used 14-Means clustering with random assignment to determine the initial clusters. Using "qualitative analysis", aka eyeballing, we determined the clusters to be:

	1. limited, backup centers (medium reb, low assists, points): Eric Dampier
	2. streaky, wing players who attack the basket and do not shoot much 3's (high scoring, avg 3pt %, avg reb and assists): Dwayne Wade, Kobe
	3. 3-point specialists (high 3pg%, low otherwise): Matt Bonner
	4. backup backcourt players (med points, low reb, medhigh assists): 
	5. strong postplayers (medhigh scoring, high rebs, medlow assists, high fg%, low 3pg%)
	6. high scoring post players (high ppg, high reb, low assists, high blocks)
	7. all-around wing playesr (above avg ppg, reb, assitsts, low 3pg)
	8. outside shooting bigs (high ppg, reb, 3pg%, low assists)
	9. defense oriented post players (low offensive stats, high reb and blocks)
	10. pass first point guards
	11. backcourt defensive specialists
	12. high scoring wing players who shoot 3s, high turnovers, low assists
	13. streaky pgs, high assists, high scoring, high turnover
	14. role playing big men, contribute in niche defensive situations

2. We learned that our dataset may not be large enough. For just the 2004-2005 NBA season, we only have about 1.5 MB of data, which does not fit the requirements of the project. We think we may need to employ our clustering/linear regression idea on a different dataset. 

3. The K-means clustering algorithm works well, but we have not started on the regressions yet. We think there will need to be some adjustment to account for binary/continuous variables when we start the regression. 

4. The most challenging aspect of working with the dataset the fact that we have 17 dimensional data, which slows the run time of our project. 

